---
layout: post
title: Breadth First Search in PostgreSQL
date:   2015-05-22 00:02:00
categories: posts
---

There are a few common ways to find the shortest path between two nodes in a graph. One of the simplest ways is to use breadth first search and keep a pointer to every node's parent node. The following is a breadth first search shortest path algorithm written in PostgreSQL. Because why not.

This is just for fun - it's not optimized in any way and there's miles of improvement that could be made. Still, it's a fun little script. It assumes a table "edges" with the columns id (integer), node1(integer), node2(integer), weight(integer). This table contains one line for every edge in the graph. Currently, it is assumed that the edges are undirected, though this could easily be changed. The algorithm also currently assumes that all edge weights are equal (i.e. it ignores the weight column entirely). This will eventually be corrected, and I'll update the code when I get around to it.

{% highlight sql linenos=table %}
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION bfs(s_node integer, f_node integer)
RETURNS integer[] AS $$
	DECLARE
		parent integer[];
		level integer[];
		i integer;
		frontier integer[];
		next integer[];
		u integer;
		v integer;
		shortest_path integer[];
		p integer;
	BEGIN
		i := 1;
		frontier[0] := s_node;
		level[s_node] := 0;
		parent[s_node] = -1;
		WHILE frontier IS NOT NULL 
		LOOP
			next := NULL;
			FOREACH u IN ARRAY frontier 
			LOOP
				FOR v IN (SELECT node2 FROM edges WHERE node1=u UNION ALL SELECT node1 FROM edges WHERE node2=u)
				LOOP
					IF level[v] IS NULL THEN
						parent[v] := u;
						level[v] := i;
						next = array_append(next, v);
						i := i + 1;
					END IF;
				END LOOP;
			END LOOP;
			frontier := next;
		END LOOP;

		shortest_path = array_append(shortest_path, f_node);
		p := parent[f_node];
		WHILE p != -1
		LOOP
			shortest_path = array_prepend(p, shortest_path);
			p := parent[p];
		END LOOP;

		return shortest_path;
END; $$
LANGUAGE PLPGSQL;

{% endhighlight %}